---
title: My interest in philosophy
description: ""
date: 2023-10-23T05:02:58.852Z
preview: ""
draft: false
tags: [philosophy]
categories: [philosophy]
comments: true
---

**I tread a path that is between nihilism and existentialism. If you are suicidal or tend to have very ill opinion of the world, read at your own risk (I'd rather you don't).**

I started reading philosophy passively picking up books from my uncle's table randomly and eventually , I have found myself drawn to both Western and Eastern philosophical traditions. This journey is not merely academic; it's a profound exploration where science and philosophy entwine, challenging and enriching our understanding of the world and ourselves. In this blog, we will embark on a 2000-word exploration, rationalizing the intriguing blend of José Ortega's Western philosophical insights with the Eastern philosophies of Zen Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta. 

### > "Yo soy yo y mi circunstancia"

José Ortega offered a fresh perspective on the existential analysis of life. His famous assertion, "I am I and my circumstance," particularly struck me as it is grounded in the belief that life does not exist in a vacuum but in constant dialogue with the conditions of its environment, opens a compelling avenue to explore life's complexity. While its a simple thought I think as we get sucked into life's silos, we start thinking compartmentalized. and simple ideas such as these can strike as profound.

I found Ortega's philosophy deeply personal yet universally applicable in terms of his argument that understanding one’s life requires *a thorough examination not only of the self but also of the broader societal and historical contexts*, taking into consideration how our personal experiences are influenced by the larger societal structures, an exploration that beautifully complements the self-centric focus of Eastern philosophies.

Ortega strongly argued for scientific pursuit of knowledge where each discovery builds upon the last, pushing humanity forward. In today's context, I believe it prompts a reconsideration of ethical values and societal norms specifically in how businesses are run.

## Eastern Philosophies: Zen Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta

Transitioning from the dynamic interplay of individual and society in Ortega’s thought, Eastern philosophies provide a contrasting yet complementary perspective focusing on inner experience and the nature of reality. Zen Buddhism, with its roots in Mahayana Buddhism, emphasizes direct experience and personal enlightenment as the path to understanding reality. Its practice is less about doctrinal knowledge and more about experiential wisdom, gained through meditation and mindfulness. Zen teaches the art of living in the moment, a concept that can seem antithetical to the Western pursuit of progress. However, this focus on the present is profoundly relevant in a world overwhelmed by past regrets and future anxieties. Zen Buddhism encourages us to experience life as it is, without the filters of our conditioned responses. For those who are beginners, consider reading the following books to understand Zen Buddhism better:

1. Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind by Shunryu Suzuki
2. The Three Pillars of Zen by Philip Kapleau
3. The Way of Zen by Alan Watts

I particularly suggest reading or listening to Alan Watts (and do not fall asleep as you listen to him) as he has a way of explaining complex ideas in a simple manner. Moving on. 

Advaita Vedanta teaches that the true self, [Atman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C4%80tman_(Hinduism)), is identical with [Brahman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brahman), the ultimate reality. This non-dualistic approach asserts that the separation we feel from the world and each other is a result of ignorance. Advaita challenges the very foundation of dualistic thinking – the distinction between the observer and the observed, the individual and the universe. By transcending these apparent separations, Advaita offers a profound peace and a unifying view of life, asserting that at the deepest level, all is one.

The philosophical approach of Ortega, with its emphasis on the circumstantial reality of life, possibly offers a unique framework to engage with the principles of Zen Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta. When you acknowledge the external influences on our lives (as Ortega suggests) while also explore the internal experience of oneness or mindfulness (however you see it), I think a more holistic picture emerges. I personally find this approach quite powerful for self-exploration and personal growth.

Until later!
